In 1926, twenty-two-year-old doctoral student J. Robert Oppenheimer, a student of experimental physicist Patrick Blackett at Cambridge's Cavendish Laboratory, is gripped by anxiety and homesickness. Oppenheimer, angry with the demanding Blackett, secretly injects potassium cyanide into his apple. Oppenheimer retrieves the apple from the hands of Niels Bohr, a visiting scientist at the institute, who suggests that he study theoretical physics in Göttingen, where Oppenheimer completes his PhD and meets Isidor Isaac Rabi. A few years later, the two met the theoretical physicist Werner Heisenberg at a conference in Switzerland.

Oppenheimer returned to the United States with the intention of exporting research into quantum mechanics, and began teaching at the University of California and the California Institute of Technology, where he started with just one student (soon gaining more). He meets his future wife, Katherine "Kitty" Puening, a biologist and former communist, and has an on-and-off relationship with Jean Tatlock, a member of the Communist Party of the United States of America.

In 1939, Nazi Germany's progress in nuclear fission research pushed Oppenheimer and his colleagues to want to replicate their results. In 1942, in the midst of World War II, US Army General Leslie Groves recruited Oppenheimer as scientific director of the Manhattan Project to develop an atomic bomb after the latter assured that he had no communist sympathies.

Oppenheimer, who is Jewish, is particularly moved by the Nazis' potential completion of their military nuclear program, led by Heisenberg. He assembles a scientific team that includes Edward Teller and Rabi in Los Alamos, New Mexico, also collaborating with scientists Enrico Fermi and David L. Hill. As the work continues, Oppenheimer is saddened by Tatlock's sudden death.

After Germany's surrender, some project scientists question the bomb's importance, while Oppenheimer believes that its use will quickly end the ongoing war in the Pacific and save Allied lives. Teller's calculations reveal a small chance that an atomic detonation could trigger an atmospheric chain reaction and destroy the world. A tormented Oppenheimer brings this to Albert Einstein, who wishes not to be involved.

The Trinity test is successful and President Harry S. Truman orders the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, forcing Japan to surrender. Oppenheimer is presented to public opinion as the "father of the atomic bomb", but the immense destruction and numerous victims of the bombings haunt him. He urges Truman to limit further development of nuclear weapons, an idea which the latter rejects.

As an advisor to the United States Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), Oppenheimer spoke out against further nuclear research, particularly Teller's proposed hydrogen bomb. His position becomes a point of contention in the midst of the tense Cold War with the Soviet Union. AEC President Lewis Strauss comes to resent Oppenheimer for dismissing his concerns about the export of radioisotopes, publicly humiliating him, and for recommending arms talks with the Soviets. Furthermore, he believes that Oppenheimer disparaged him to Einstein in 1947.

At a hearing intended to eliminate Oppenheimer's political influence (secretly orchestrated by Strauss), Teller and other associates betray him, and his past alliances with the Communists are used against him. Oppenheimer's security clearance is revoked, which damages his public image and limits his influence on nuclear policy.

In 1959, during Strauss's Senate confirmation hearing for Secretary of Commerce, Hill testified for the scientific community about Strauss's personal motivations in engineering Oppenheimer's downfall. The US Senate votes against his nomination. In 1963, President Lyndon B. Johnson presented Oppenheimer with the Enrico Fermi Prize as a gesture of political rehabilitation.

A flashback shows the conversation between Einstein and Oppenheimer in 1947, revealing that Oppenheimer had not mentioned Strauss but had expressed his grim belief that he had indeed started a chain reaction, the nuclear arms race, that would destroy the world.